The general objective of the project is to measure the
“vital signs” of well-being of the rivers that are part of the Maipo valley watershed.
This is why we are taking measurements in 5 different
locations of the river network, thus allowing us
to compare measurements of these vital
signs that are related to the quality of the water.
People that live on the banks of the river can approach us
and start to understand how changeable and vulnerable our rivers are.
We are often not aware of what may
end up being added to our rivers and where this may happen.
When we can note that one of the parameters
related to pollution has suddenly changed between one measurement point and the next,
then we can gauge where pollution is entering the river system.
Our purpose is to create a baseline, so as to know
the levels of chlorine, nitrates, temperature, salinity, whether
there is a presence of pesticides and coliform bacteria and
therefore we can have a baseline for detecting future changes.
These changes that could be related to natural changes that are
related to climate change or they could be
caused by human activities such as, for example,
mining activities in this area, which could all affect water quality.
It is important because this river sustains
life in this valley as well as providing the
drinking water for the city of Santiago.
We have now experienced 12 years of drought in the area,
reducing the quantity of water in the river Maipo by over 30%
and its capacity to clean the pollutants, minerals and sediments becomes more difficult.
There is a strong feedback from the local volunteers
in this project and we can start a
conversation about what we are measuring.
The data that we are creating, in the form of numbers
needs to be interpreted and thanks to this vital local knowledge,
the data becomes much more real and relevant
rather than a supposition of what is happening.
This is the strength of Citizen science,
that local people who are are taking the measurements
are also participating in a dialogue related to the interpretation of the data.